[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> This is "Book Tours,"
and I'm Corinne Edwards.
Mention John Steinbeck, and
everyone recognizes the name.
But what the world does not know
is the story behind his stories
and the effect of his
fame on his family.
Nancy Steinbeck, the widow of
his son, John Steinbeck IV,
tells it all and heard book,
"The Other Side of Eden."
It's a tale of love,
devotion, and the devastation
of alcoholism on a family.
And as many of you
know, you don't
have to be famous to
experience this problem.
Nancy, welcome to
Wisdom Television.
>> It's wonderful to be here.
Thank you, Corinne.
>> What a fabulous book.
>> I'm glad you liked it.
>> You know, when
your husband died,
he was in process of
writing his autobiography.
And what prompted
you to pick it up?
>> Well, I had actually
made a promise to him.
He died in a back operation.
And before he went in for
surgery, I suddenly had a--
well, based on a dream
I'd had that night
about our German shepherd puppy
dying, and a voice saying,
I'm taking my angel back today.
And you're not supposed to
feel sorry for yourself.
This is part of
the greater plan.
And I said to John
that morning, what
happens if something-- what
should I do about your book?
And he said, finish it.
He didn't even miss a beat.
It was just like, finish it.
So I knew when he died--
>> And this was not a
life-threatening operation.
>> No.
>> --he was having.
I mean, there was no reason for
you to have this premonition.
>> No, it was back surgery.
>> That's amazing.
So the book is it's
very interesting
because it's his
book, but you fill
in the blanks of what happened
in between in both your lives.
>> Yes, because he had
only finished about 50%
of the autobiography.
So the chapters are interwoven,
and there's the two voices.
>> It seems that both you and
your late husband John came
from similar backgrounds
of dysfunctional,
severely dysfunctional families.
>> Yes, a lot of abuse, a lot of
boundaries crossed that should
never have been crossed, and
alcoholism, severe alcoholism.
>> You know, they say that 98%
of families are dysfunctional
today.
>> Yeah.
>> Do you agree with that?
>> Absolutely.
I think 100%.
Oh, I think if you haven't
worked on yourself,
it's just normal, because it's
a generational pattern that
just goes through.
I think that consciousness has
changed in the last generation.
So those of us that are
raising kids now, especially
in the boomer generation,
I think we really
did come to some sort
of point where we said,
this will not be passed on.
It stops here.
It stops with my generation.
>> Do you think people are
less now blaming their families
for their problems
than they did before?
>> Yes.
I think there is more a point
where you have to stop saying,
I was the victim, and
poor me, and saying, I
am not going to do this.
I am not going to
replicate those patterns.
>> You know, one of
the things that you--
very interesting to
me, one of the things.
You said there were rules of
dysfunctional families, three
rules.
>> Don't talk, don't
trust, don't feel.
Don't talk about the elephant
in the living room, whether it's
daddy's drinking or
mom's rageaholism,
or little brother
acting out all the time.
Don't talk about it.
And don't trust your instincts.
Listen to what the family tells
you, because it's like a cult.
They will tell you how this is
to be treated, how things are
to be swept under the carpet.
And don't feel.
Don't pay attention
to your feelings.
Because god forbid if
you feel your feelings,
the truth will come out,
and you will be shunned.
>> By society?
>> No, by the family.
>> Oh, by the family.
>> It's like a cult. You
know, we don't talk about
daddy's drinking.
We don't talk about mom's anger.
We don't talk about
mom's pill problem.
>> Now, having--
>> It's a thing of,
our family is perfect.
>> Yeah.
Or if it's not, we don't
want to recognize it.
>> Right.
>> Do you think that this is
true in all alcoholic families?
>> I think if there has not been
awareness and there hasn't been
therapy or involvement in
a 12-step program, yes.
>> Now, you mentioned in your
book here that you should have
recognized the first signs of
your husband's alcoholism when
on your first meeting, he asked
you to go out and get a bottle
of liquor for him,
and you just went.
>> Because it's normal because
I grew up in an alcoholic home.
At the time that I met
John, everyone I knew drank.
I was drinking.
It's normal that if you're
going to get together socially,
you have alcohol.
That was not a red flag to me.
Now, it would be.
>> It would?
>> Yeah.
>> But this was 25 years ago.
>> You talk about that one
of the things that you then--
you got together with John.
You fell madly in
love with each other,
and eventually
moved in together,
and eventually married.
And then you got
on this program,
which was fascinating
to me, of what you
referred to as magical
thinking, following
the gurus of the world.
Tell us about that.
>> Well, John and I met at
a Buddhist seminary that was
given by Trungpa Rinpoche, who
was the notorious crazy wisdom
girl who founded Naropa
University in Boulder,
Colorado, which is a
quite well-known center
for contemplative studies.
And he was an
outrageous alcoholic,
and he never made any
bones about hiding it,
Trungpa Rinpoche.
So people would say,
well, yes, he drinks.
But he doesn't hide it,
so what's wrong with that?
Well, many of us that
were attracted to him--
and there were thousands, and
it was right about the time
that John and I
met there was 1975.
It was like the hip place to be.
It was like a
spiritual Woodstock.
Baba Ram Dass, and all the
beat poets and musicians,
everyone came there.
And it was the greatest
thing since the '60s.
He was very
charismatic, Trungpa.
And we, again, we
thought it was normal.
Hey, we came from
a drinking culture,
and now our guru drank.
That's great.
And he did have a
very enlightened side.
There is no doubt about it
that the man was a genius.
But he was also a
severe alcoholic.
>> And a womanizer.
>> And a terrible womanizer,
which again was accepted
by the community as normal.
>> That was a sexual
revolution at that time.
>> Right.
>> And that was also
very acceptable.
>> Exactly, exactly.
>> So tell me the progression
of what happened here.
You started following
these gurus.
You went all over the world
seeking some of them out.
>> Well, we were mostly
students of Trungpa Rinpoche's.
And then when we traveled
around the world,
we met other gurus, other
lamas of that lineage.
But he was predominantly
the one we followed.
And again, when a child comes
from an alcoholic family,
they're always
looking for utopia,
because we were
used to dystopia.
So we're always looking for the
good mommy or the good daddy.
And that's what
these gurus set up.
They promised enlightenment.
They say they will do it for
you as long as you give them
your first born child, and all
your devotion, and your money.
>> And your money.
>> But again, I have to
say this was 20 years ago.
This was hip.
This was the hip thing.
This is when Mia Farrow and the
Beatles were flocking to India.
And we thought that
we were getting
away from the functionality
of our parents
by following a system
that was exotic.
>> And nobody over
30 was to be trusted.
>> Right.
And this was exotic.
Our parents couldn't
even pronounce the words
in the language
we were learning.
So it was a rebellion against
the religion of our childhood.
But we woke up all of a
sudden, and guess what?
We.
Were right back in the
system of our childhood
don't talk, don't
trust, don't feel.
Don't talk about the guru's
drinking or womanizing,
or you will be shunned.
And exactly the
same thing happened.
>> You know, Andrew Harvey
wrote the open for your book,
the forward.
And one of his
greatest cries today
is that don't trust anybody who
claims to be a teacher if they
ask for money, if
they ask for sex,
or if they tell
you what to think.
>> Exactly.
>> Now, do you think that those
people, that type of guru,
that type of spiritual leader,
is it still happening today?
>> Yes, it absolutely
is happening.
And I think that the people that
are entrenched in those systems
are in such denial.
And they don't want to
face the pain of having
to deal with the
bleakness of coming
to some understanding
of the divine
or what sustains you
spiritually on your own.
That's very difficult. I
mean, when my husband died,
it was not Buddhism
that sustained me
through that tremendous
shock and horror of losing
the beloved.
I was turning to this
12-step program which
forces you to define a
higher power according
to your understanding.
Not to scripture,
not to what you've
been told in classes and
by the guru in lectures,
but what through the very
darkest night, what sustains
you, how you understand God.
>> Do you think that you had
a different experience with
alcoholism?
Because let's face it, both
of you came from rich people,
came from the privileged class.
Do you think you had
a different experience
with the damage of alcoholism
because of the money?
>> No.
I don't think
money, fame, nothing
masks the veneer of the
pain of an alcoholic family.
I think you scratch the
surface, and it's all the same.
>> Everybody comes
down to zero here.
>> Yeah.
>> I want to talk about
alcoholism and how your husband
really got sober in a minute,
but we have to take a break.
It's a fascinating story, Nancy.
>> Thank you.
>> We're talking to Nancy
Steinbeck about her fabulous
book, "The Other Side of Eden."
Stay with us.
It's a compelling story.
We'll be right back.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We're talking to Nancy Steinbeck
about her fascinating book,
"The Other Side of Eden."
Welcome back, Nancy.
>> Thank you.
>> We were talking about your
husband and the fact that
the alcoholism is the same
no matter what strata you are
in society.
But tell me a little bit
about one thing here.
You kept threatening
to leave him.
All through the book,
you were going to leave.
>> I was very conflicted
and very torn,
because he really pushed
me, as all alcoholics do.
They push you to the brink.
I mean, they terrorize.
They create tremendous
emotional stress and chaos.
But there was something
about John's inner essence
that was so beautiful,
just such a lovely person,
that I just couldn't do it.
And I prayed that I
would have the ability.
And I'd ask the
kids, do you think--
and they'd say, no, Mom.
We love him.
We just loved him.
We took him to a therapist
once, and the therapist
called me afterwards
and said, you know,
I understand why
you don't leave him.
He is a really cool guy.
He said, don't let anybody
tell you you're not healthy
because you stay.
>> You said one of the things
that you didn't leave him
for was that any other man would
have bored you to death after
John.
>> I think that
sometimes happens, yeah.
I mean, he had a
fabulous personality.
He really did.
He was well-read, had
tremendous eclectic knowledge
about all kinds of subjects,
and he was extremely funny.
And he had just had
the warmest heart.
He was just pure love.
It's that "Dr.
Jekyll, Mr. Hyde."
>> Yeah.
You say one of the problems
with living with an alcoholic
is you don't know who's
going to be there today.
>> Exactly.
and that sets up a lot of
confusion, and uncertainty,
and it's very stressful.
>> I'm very, very
confused about something.
John went in for treatment
of his alcoholism
at least once or twice.
>> Three times.
>> And it never worked.
And then toward the end of the
book, you say he joined AA.
Now, people in AA never want
to talk about it, you know?
They have all these rules
about being anonymous.
>> Yes.
>> But I would like to know
why does AA work when a 28-day
in-house program
doesn't sometimes?
>> Well, that's what the 28 days
does is it breaks the habit,
especially if it's impatient,
so that you are taken away from
the social milieu or
the drinking buddies.
You're away from the
temptations, the bars,
the bottle.
And then every 28-day treatment
program has an aftercare plan.
And what they say
to do is go to AA.
A lot of times they'll say
90 meetings in 90 days.
And sometimes, John would
go to three meetings a day.
The responsibility is
then upon the alcoholic
to get to those meetings.
And when they stop
going to the meetings,
that's when it stops working.
As long as they go to
the meetings, it works.
There is some magic
in those rooms.
There really is.
>> What happens?
>> It's faith healing.
They learn how to get
out of their heads,
where the alcoholic is always
in this grandiose scheme of how
he's going to live his
life-- they're always legends
in their own minds--
and they learn how to love
themselves in the program.
And they learn how to
turn a lot of their life
over to the care and
understanding of their higher
power, how they define--
>> They don't talk
about God, do they?
>> Well, it's how you define it.
Alcoholics Anonymous is
all around the world,
so it works for any religion.
It does not have to be Yahweh,
or Christ, or whatever.
It's how you understand it.
And I think that's why
it works because it
forces you to define your
spirituality on a very
personal level.
And the other thing
about 12-step meetings
is they really teach
you living skills.
And alcoholics are
arrested children.
Oftentimes, they
are the age when
they started drinking-- in
John's case-- or drugging.
In John's case, he was addicted
to codeine at the age of seven.
So when I met him--
>> His mother used
to give him codeine.
>> Right.
>> --at seven and got
him addicted to it.
>> Yeah.
>> That is so amazing.
>> Yeah, I know.
And so when I met him,
he was seven years old.
So he had the functioning,
the emotional,
and the life skills--
>> You mean seven
years old in his head.
>> Right.
>> Yeah, in his
heart, in his mind.
>> In the maturity.
And I think there's something
about going to meetings
and hearing how other
people live their lives one
day at a time that really
helps people just hang on.
And they say the biggest
reason for relapse among men
is the need for camaraderie.
So you see at a meaning,
you have camaraderie.
I mean, they go to meetings, and
they'll go out after, and have
coffee, and stay up all night.
And if you feel like
drinking, someone
will come to your house in
a heartbeat and talk to you.
And it is just a
fabulous fellowship.
>> And that's why--
do you think it
had to do with AA
or do you think it had
to do that he finally
decided he was no longer
going to be an alcoholic?
>> I think it's a little bit of
both, a little bit of both but.
But it is definitely
going to the meetings.
Just showing up for those
meetings, that's the key.
>> Then you talk about that
you went to Al-Anon yourself.
>> Yes, and I was--
>> Tell people what Al-Anon is.
>> It's the group for family
members who are related
to alcoholics and addicts.
So if you're a parent,
or a husband, or a wife,
or a child of an alcoholic,
that is the place
to go to learn
about the disease.
And what you learn there is
if you had a relative that
had cancer, you
would go and find out
all you could about it.
And in Al-Anon,
you're urged to learn
all you can about the
disease of alcoholism,
that it is a disease.
And they have all
these great slogans
that promote compassion
for the alcoholic
and allow the spouse
or the family member
to detach from the rage, and
the anger, and the heartbreak.
So they'll say things
like detach with love.
Hate the disease,
not love the person.
So you can hate the
disease of alcoholism,
but it still allows
you to love the person.
And it's very important to
understand that alcoholism
is a mental disease.
It's also a physical disease.
But the component of
the spiritual bankruptcy
and the fact that
these people can
be so heartless and
cruel in one moment,
and so loving, and so charming--
>> The "Dr. Jekyll
and Mr. Hyde"--
>> Right.
>> --theory.
>> At the same time, you have
to learn how to deal with that,
because living with an alcoholic
is like living in a war zone.
It's very, very
difficult, as it would
be if you lived with a person
who had Alzheimer's or cancer.
It's difficult
living with disease.
>> It's constantly waiting
for the other shoe to drop.
>> Constant vigilance,
hyper vigilance, I call it.
>> So tell me
about yourself now.
Are you glad now that
you didn't leave him?
>> Yes, I really am, because
those last three years
of sobriety were so rewarding.
It was so wonderful
for us to see him
as we really knew
he was, and to see
him get back his creativity,
and his brilliance.
I mean, he was always brilliant.
He was a genius.
But to see that really be
put into action and the way
he wrote so
beautifully, absolutely.
It was a true victory.
>> So it was worth all
the pain of the journey.
>> Very much, yes.
And also, you just
can't sit there
while I'm Pollyanna and
related to an alcoholic.
I had to look--
the relationship forced
me to look at what
qualities in myself, why I was
attracted to him, why I stayed.
And it forced me to
really face myself.
So I really got to know
myself, and I don't think you
can be given a better gift,
a greater gift than that.
>> What does his family
think about this book?
>> Well, they are upset
about it because no one--
and it's understandable.
They really don't want that side
of Steinbeck, the dark side.
>> So it comes back
to the three rules.
>> Exactly.
>> Don't tell.
Don't trust.
Don't feel.
>> Right.
And they want to
propagate the myth
that Steinbeck was this
wonderful compassionate
man, the conscience of
America, which he was known as.
And yes, he had that in him.
But he also had a dark side.
And I tell people that we need
to celebrate his dark side,
because he is known as the
master of the human condition.
And where did he
come up with that?
Well, you don't pull
those kinds of characters
like "Of Mice and
Men" George shooting
Lenny unless you have a darkness
in you, a depth to your soul.
>> Or you have had a
lot of pain yourself.
>> Exactly.
>> I mean, he must've
had a lot of mental pain,
a lot of heartbreak--
>> Yes.
>> --that he probably
put into his novel.
>> Yes, and we should
celebrate that.
And as Andrew Harvey
says in the introduction,
it should cause us
to have more sympathy
for the man as a writer.
Again, we want to look at gurus.
We want these myths.
The guru will do it for us.
Steinbeck is a great man.
And Johnny had this montage
just when he was growing up,
just because a man is a great
writer and a Nobel Prize winner
does not mean he's
a great father.
Why do we expect
this of our figures?
>> They have to be everything.
>> Because we're children.
They have to be everything.
They have to be perfection.
And it's very
important for us now
to understand that there is
no perfection in humanity.
We're human beings.
We've got shadow sides.
>> Does the family feel
friendly toward you still?
>> Oh, no.
No, and there was--
>> Because of the book?
>> Yes.
And there was
animosity between John
and Steinbeck's third wife when
he was alive, because they knew
Johnny was the truth teller.
>> So they weren't too
happy to have this come out.
>> No.
>> How do you feel about
them not accepting it?
>> I'm not surprised.
It fits into the whole
dysfunctional system,
doesn't it?
>> Yes, it does.
Yes, it does.
Tell me, you've had
a lot of experience
not only with a husband and
his family who is alcoholic,
but also in your family.
You've had terrible
abuse in your family.
What would you say
to someone out there
who may not come
from a famous family,
but who has suffered
like you have suffered,
like your husband has suffered?
What advice would you give them?
>> Get therapy.
Do as much self-help
reading as you can.
Go to 12-step
meetings, because there
are a myriad of 12-step meetings
for all kinds of people.
You don't just have to be
related to an alcoholic.
And do work on yourself.
And find out where
this started and how
it can stop, because it can.
It really can.
>> What do you want to do with
the rest of your life, Nancy?
>> Keep writing, keep traveling.
>> Yeah?
>> Keep living.
>> You live a very quiet life
now after this very hectic
world, traveling person.
>> Yeah.
>> Do you like it?
>> I like it now.
But I also enjoy traveling
and meeting people,
and the book has been
a marvelous opportunity
to do that.
>> Do you think you have
another book in you?
>> Oh, yeah, I do.
>> Well, we look forward to it.
>> Well, thank you.
>> I'll tell you, this is a
fascinating, fascinating story.
Thank you so much
for writing it,
and for writing it in such
an open and honest way.
It really makes the reader
feel as though they know you.
Thanks for being on
Wisdom Television.
We've been talking
to Nancy Steinbeck
about her very
interesting book called
"The Other Side of Eden."
As I always tell
you around here,
we bring you the most important
new messengers in publishing
today on this show.
These are authors who care
about you, so keep coming back.
[MUSIC PLAYING]